Criminal Misc Petition No 274 of 2008 Rajesh    Kurre Vs. 1.  Safurabai

HIGH COURT OF CHATTISGARH AT BILASPUR      




            Criminal Misc Petition No 274 of 2008




                      Rajesh    Kurre
                                   ...Petitioners


                           Versus


                  1.  Safurabai

                   2.  Shobhnath Kurre

                   3.  Rakesh   Kurre

                   4.  Santosh

                   5.  Smt.   Baby  Bai
                                     ...Respondents



   {Application under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal
                      Procedure, 1973}


!     Mr. Utkarsh Verma, counsel for the applicant


^     Mr. N.K. Chaterjee, counsel for non-applicant No.1
      Mr. Pallav Mishra, counsel for non-applicants No.2 to 5




Honble Mr. T.P. Sharma, J 



       Dated:11/11/2008



:       Judgment

                            ORDER
               (Passed on 11th November, 2008)

1.    By this petition, the applicant has challenged legality
  &amp;  propriety of the judgment dated 17-4-2008 passed by  the
  Sessions  Judge,  Kabirdham  in Criminal  Appeal  No.5/2008
  whereby learned Sessions Judge has partly modified the amount
  of  monthly maintenance awarded to the non-applicants under
  the  provisions of Section 20 (1) (d) of the Protection  of
  Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005 (for short `the Act')
  by the Judicial Magistrate, First Class, Kawardha vide order
  dated 14-12-2007 in Misc. Criminal Case No.76/2007.

2.    The  part  of the judgment is challenged on the  ground
  that  while  awarding any maintenance  in  accordance  with
  Section 20 (1) (d) of the Act, the Court is required to award
  maintenance in accordance with Section 125 of the  Code  of
  Criminal  Procedure, 1973 (for short `the Code'),  but  the
  trial Court has not awarded maintenance in accordance  with
  Section 125 of the Code and thereby committed illegality.

3.   I have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused
  the record of the trial Court as also the appellate Court.

4.    Short  question raised by the applicant is that at  the
  time of awarding any monetary relief in terms of Section 20
  (1)  (d) of the Act, whether the Court is required to  take
  into  consideration  the  liability  and  entitlement   for
  maintenance in terms of Section 125 of the Code?

5.    Learned counsel for the applicant submits that  Section
  20  (1)  of  the Act envisages that while disposing  of  an
  application  under  sub-section  (1)  of  section  12,  the
  Magistrate  is  competent to direct the respondent  to  pay
  monetary  relief to meet the expenses incurred  and  losses
  suffered by the aggrieved person as a result of the domestic
  violence including the maintenance for the aggrieved person
  as well as her children, if any, including an order under or
  in addition to an order of maintenance under section 125 of
  the Code.  Learned counsel further submits that in accordance
  with the provisions of Section 125 of the Code, the aggrieved
  party  is  required to prove that he or she  is  unable  to
  maintain  himself/herself and having sufficient  cause  for
  separate living and the person against whom maintenance  is
  claimed is having sufficient means, but he is not maintaining
  the  aggrieved person.  Therefore, at the time of disposing
  the application under Section 12 (1) of the Act if the Court
  directs  for payment of any expenses including maintenance,
  then  the Court is required to examine the entitlement  and
  liability in accordance with Section 125 of the Code.

6.   On the other hand, learned counsel appearing for the non-
  applicants supported the judgment impugned and submitted that
  the  provisions for maintenance under Section 20 of the Act
  are in addition to an order of maintenance under Section 125
  of  the Code therefore, at the time of passing any order of
  maintenance under Section 20 of the Act, the Court  is  not
  required  to  examine  the  case  in  accordance  with  the
  provisions of Section 125 of the Code.  The provisions  are
  independent and in addition to the provisions of maintenance
  under the Code.  Learned counsel further submit that Section
  20 of the Act is a special provision for maintenance to the
  persons aggrieved under the Act.  This section empowers  to
  order  lump sum or monthly payments for maintenance.   Sub-
  section (6) of Section 20 of the Act empowers to direct the
  employer or a debtor of the non-applicant, to directly pay to
  the aggrieved person or to deposit with the court a portion
  of  the wages or salaries or debt due to or accrued to  the
  credit of the respondent.  Relief available under Section 20
  of  the Act is additional relief available to the aggrieved
  person  and  in accordance with Section 26 of the  Act  the
  aggrieved person may also avail the remedy before  a  civil
  court, family court or a criminal court in addition to  and
  along with any other reliefs available under the Act.

7.   In order to appreciate the contentions of the parties, I
  have  examined  the provisions relating to monetary  relief
  provided under Section 20 of the Act.  Section 20 of the Act
  reads as follows: -
          "20. Monetary reliefs.-(1) While disposing of
          an   application  under  sub-section  (1)  of
          section  12,  the Magistrate may  direct  the
          respondent to pay monetary relief to meet the
          expenses incurred and losses suffered by  the
          aggrieved  person  and  any  child   of   the
          aggrieved person as a result of the  domestic
          violence and such relief may include, but  is
          not limited to,--
               (a)    the loss of earnings;
               (b)    the medical expenses;
               (c)      the  loss  caused  due  to  the
                 destruction, damage or removal of  any
                 property  from  the  control  of   the
                 aggrieved person; and
               (d)       the   maintenance   for    the
                 aggrieved  person  as  well   as   her
                 children, if any, including  an  order
                 under  or  in addition to an order  of
                 maintenance under section 125  of  the
                 Code  of  Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2
                 of  1974)  or  any other law  for  the
                 time being in force.

            (2)  The monetary relief granted under this
          section   shall   be   adequate,   fair   and
          reasonable  and consistent with the  standard
          of  living  to which the aggrieved person  is
          accustomed.

            (3) The Magistrate shall have the power  to
          order  an  appropriate lump  sum  payment  or
          monthly  payments  of  maintenance,  as   the
          nature  and  circumstances of  the  case  may
          require.

            (4)  The  Magistrate shall send a  copy  of
          the order for monetary relief made under sub-
          section (1) to the parties to the application
          and  to  the in-charge of the police  station
          within the local limits of whose jurisdiction
          the respondent resides.

            (5)  The  respondent shall pay the monetary
          relief granted to the aggrieved person within
          the  period specified in the order under sub-
          section (1).

            (6)  Upon  the failure on the part  of  the
          respondent  to make payment in terms  of  the
          order  under sub-section (1), the  Magistrate
          may  direct the employer or a debtor  of  the
          respondent, to directly pay to the  aggrieved
          person or to deposit with the court a portion
          of  the wages or salaries or debt due  to  or
          accrued  to  the  credit of  the  respondent,
          which  amount  may  be adjusted  towards  the
          monetary relief payable by the respondent."

8.    Section 20 of the Act says that at the time of disposal
  of the application under sub-section (1) of Section 12, the
  Magistrate  is  competent to direct the respondent  to  pay
  monetary relief to the effected or aggrieved person or  any
  child  of  the aggrieved person as a result of the domestic
  violence and such relief may include, but is not limited to,
  the  maintenance for the aggrieved person as  well  as  her
  children, if any, including an order under or in addition to
  an order of maintenance under section 125 of the Code or any
  other law for the time being in force.  Sub-section (2)  of
  Section 20 of the Act empowers the Magistrate to grant such
  relief  which  shall be adequate, fair and  reasonable  and
  consistent with the standard of living to which the aggrieved
  is  accustomed.  Sub-section (3) of Section 20 of  the  Act
  empowers  the Magistrate to order an appropriate  lump  sum
  payment or monthly payments of maintenance, as the nature and 
  circumstances of the case may require.  Sub-section (6)  of
  Section 20 empowers the Magistrate to direct the employer or
  a debtor of the respondent, to directly pay to the aggrieved
  person.  Section 26 of the Act reads as follows:-
          "26.   Relief  in  other  suits   and   legal
          proceedings.-(1) Any relief  available  under
          sections  18, 19, 20, 21 and 22 may  also  be
          sought  in  any  legal proceeding,  before  a
          civil  court,  family  court  or  a  criminal
          court, affecting the aggrieved person and the
          respondent   whether  such   proceeding   was
          initiated before or after the commencement of
          this Act.

               (2)  Any  relief  referred  to  in  sub-
          section (1) may be sought for in addition  to
          and  along  with  any other relief  that  the
          aggrieved  person may seek in  such  suit  or
          legal  proceeding before a civil or  criminal
          court.

               (3) In case any relief has been obtained
          by  the  aggrieved person in any  proceedings
          other  than a proceeding under this Act,  she
          shall  be  bound to inform the Magistrate  of
          the grant of such relief."

9.    Section 26 of the Act says that relief available  under
  sections 18, 19, 20, 21 and 22 may also be sought in addition
  to and along with any other relief which the aggrieved person
  may seek in any legal proceeding before a civil court, family
  court or a criminal court.  Relief of maintenance to wife and
  children  is  available  to the effected  party  under  his
  entitlement and liability of the person against whom relief
  is claimed under Section 125 of the Code, when such person is
  unable to maintain herself and the person against whom relief
  is  claimed  is  under  obligation to maintain  and  having
  sufficient  means to maintain, but fails  to  maintain  the
  applicants.  But in case of domestic violence, the Court is
  empowered to grant such relief if the person is aggrieved as
  a  result  of the domestic violence and may grant  monetary
  relief in terms of maintenance which would be adequate, fair
  and reasonable and consistent with the standard of living to
  which the aggrieved party is accustomed and also empowered to 
  grant  lump  sum or monthly maintenance or  to  direct  the
  employer or a debtor of the respondent to directly pay to the
  aggrieved person or to deposit with the court a portion  of
  the  wages  or  salaries.  However, the Magistrate  is  not
  empowered  to grant relief in such form in accordance  with
  Section 125 of the Code.  At the time of interpretation  of
  statutes, the Court is required to see whether the provisions
  of the statute are plain, unambiguous and capable of giving
  their ordinary meaning.

10.   In the matter of J.P. Bansal v. State of Rajasthan  and
  another1 the Apex Court has held that
          "When the words of a Statute are clear, plain
          or   unambiguous  i.e.  they  are  reasonably
          susceptible to only one meaning,  the  Courts
          are  bound  to  give effect to  that  meaning
          irrespective of consequences.  The  intention
          of   the  Legislature  is  primarily  to   be
          gathered from the language used, which  means
          that  attention should be paid  to  what  has
          been said as also to what has not been said."

11.   While  dealing  with the question of Interpretation  of
  Statutes, the Apex Court has held in the case of Gurudevdatta
  VKSSS Maryadit and others v. State of Maharashtra and others2 
  that
          "..it    is    a   cardinal   principle    of
          interpretation of statute that the words of a
          statute  must be understood in their natural,
          ordinary   or  popular  sense  and  construed
          according   to  their  grammatical   meaning,
          unless   such  construction  leads  to   some
          absurdity or unless there is something in the
          context  or  in the object of the statute  to
          suggest to the contrary.  The golden rules is
          that  the words of a statute must prima facie
          be  given their ordinary meaning.  It is  yet
          another  rule of construction that  when  the
          words  of  the statute are clear,  plain  and
          unambiguous then the Courts are bound to give
          effect  to that meaning, irrespective of  the
          consequences.   It  is said  that  the  words
          themselves best declare the intention of  the
          law  giver.  The Courts have adhered  to  the
          principle that efforts should be made to give
          meaning  to each and every word used  by  the
          legislature  and it is not a sound  principle
          of  construction to brush aside  words  in  a
          statute  as  being inapposite  surpluses,  if
          they   can  have  a  proper  application   in
          circumstances    conceivable    within    the
          contemplation of the statute."

12.   The  golden rule of interpretation of statutes is  that
  the  words  of  a statute must prima facie be  given  their
ordinary  meaning.  The words of provisions under Section  20
  of the Act are clear, plain and unambiguous.  The provisions
  are  independent  and are in addition to any  other  remedy
  available to the aggrieved under any legal proceeding before
  the  civil  Court,  criminal Court or  family  Court.   The
  provisions are not dependent upon Section 125 of the Code or
  any  other provisions of the Family Courts Act. 1984 or any
  other Act relating to award of maintenance.  In case of award
  of maintenance to the aggrieved person under the provisions
  of  the Act, the Court is competent to award maintenance to
  the  aggrieved person and child of the aggrieved person  in
  accordance with the provisions of Section 20 of the Act and
  the aggrieved person is not required to establish his case in
  terms of Section 125 of the Code.

13.  Learned trial Court after arriving at a finding that the
  non-applicants are aggrieved as a result of domestic violence
  has awarded maintenance in accordance with Section 20 of the
  Act.   The trial Court has committed neither any illegality
  nor any infirmity while passing the order impugned.

14.   In the result, I do not find any merit and substance in
  the  petition,  same is liable to be dismissed  and  it  is
  accordingly, dismissed.

                                                    J U D G E

